in the beginning God created the
universe and a planet called early
humans were formed in God's image to
continue God's work but soon humans
decided we want to live our way not
God's selfishness and violence filled
the world
so God started over with just one family
and God made a covenant with a man named
Abraham the land around you is now yours
your family will be my blessing to the
entire world in just a few generations
they grew into a large nation named
Israel the Egyptians became fearful and
forced the Israelites to be their slaves
through a humble leader named Moses God
led the Israelites in a great exodus
back toward their promised land along
the journey
God gave laws and commands to help the
Israelites follow God's ways finally
after 40 years of struggle and
complaining in the desert the Israelites
arrived back home in the Promised Land
in victory the people worshiped God but
soon after they turned from God and live
their own rebellious ways this became a
pattern from generation to generation
Israel's greatest judge was Samuel he
followed God's ways and spoke for God as
a prophet he told Israel that God was
the only King they ever needed but they
desired to be like the corrupt nations
surrounding them and insisted we want a
human king who we can see to rule over
us just like the other nations so Samuel
found a man named Saul to be Israel's
first king his reign began well but
before long saw stopped following God's
ways and made many bad decisions so
Samuel told Saul because you have turned
your back on God God has rejected you as
a king samuel searched for the next king
led to a courageous young shepherd boy
named david when david grew up to be
king god blessed him and the israelites
greatly but david was not perfect he had
an affair with a married woman and
committed a murder to cover it up
but deep inside David always loved God
and would return to living in God's ways
known as the poet warrior he wrote music
to God called Psalms heartfelt
expressions of Prayer struggle and
thankfulness after many years as King
David gave the throne to his son Solomon
God also told David one day one of your
descendants will rule with the kingdom
that will never end
Solomon succeeded his father David
becoming the richest King in Israel's
history full of God's wisdom Solomon
wrote books like Proverbs and built a
magnificent temple of permanent
tabernacle reminding people of God's
continual presence but Solomon strayed
from God
marrying corrupt wives who led him into
worshipping false gods civil war broke
out dividing the country into a Northern
Kingdom called Israel and a southern
kingdom called Judah soon both of these
kingdoms were led by corrupt Kings who
ignored God's win during this time
prophets were sent as messengers calling
the Israelites to return to God they
warned of the destructive consequences
ahead the prophet Elijah a wild and
rugged man showed up false prophets by
calling on God to give an awesome
display of fire the prophet Elijah
followed him bringing a boy back to life
by causing him to sneeze these prophets
challenged the Israelites and their
kings to return to God's better ways but
the Israelites would not listen
distracted in their own rebellion other
nations swept in and conquered both of
the kingdoms of Israel and Judah God's
people were forced out of the promised
land and many were taken away to be
slaves once again the temple was
destroyed and the people lost everything
this was a time called the exile where
many of the Israelites now called Jews
were scattered across different lands
one prophet named Daniel was sent to a
city named Babylon the law demanded that
everyone pray only to the king of
Babylon but Daniel
used and prayed to God three times a day
so Daniel was thrown into a pit of
hungry lions but God blows the mouths of
the Lions and Daniel emerged the next
morning without a scratch those
scattered God was still watching over
the Jewish people and God gave them hope
speaking through the Prophet Jeremiah's
words I'll make a new covenant with the
people of Israel returning them to the
promised land and filling their hearts
and minds with my ways 60 years later
this hope was realized the Persian
Empire freed the Jewish people to return
to their promised land a small number
gathered back in the capital city of
Jerusalem and a new smaller temple was
built under the leadership of Ezra
reunited they celebrated and shouted
with joy but the elders wept in
remembrance of what was lost profits
like Malachi and Isaiah pointed to the
future and a coming king a messiah one
who would fully restore Israel and bring
a new kingdom of peace so the Jewish
people waited and hoped and God would
not speak through the prophets again for
400 years